# Glossary of terms

**Site**: [Sites](/kb/deploy/sites) are user-created environments where admins
can manage Resources and the Gateways that enable access to those Resources
(e.g. US-West, Chicago-LAN, or Prod). All Gateways and Resources in a Site are
assumed to be able to reach each other in a shared network context such as a VPC
or LAN.

**Gateway**: [Gateways](/kb/deploy/gateways) are Firezone servers that run on
your infrastructure. Gateways must be defined within a Site, and any traffic
to/from resources associated with a Site will pass through one of that Siteâ€™s
Gateways. We distribute the Gateway as self-contained binaries on our
[releases page](https://github.com/firezone/firezone/releases), or as a Docker
image or Systemd unit file with instructions shown when you deploy the Gateway
from the admin portal. Gateways can run on everything from a Raspberry Pi to
bare metal servers and everything in between. Gateways are designed to be
lightweight and don't require persistent storage to function.

**Resource**: A [Resource](/kb/deploy/resources) is any DNS name, IP, or network
(CIDR range) you wish to manage access for. DNS-based Resources can be used to
manage access to internal or external applications and automatically match all
subdomains as well. CIDR-based Resources can be used to manage access for an
entire subnets, similar to a traditional VPN.

**Policy**: [Policies](/kb/deploy/policies) define a one-to-one mapping between
a user group and a Resource. Access to Resources is default-deny, which means a
user can't access a Resource until a Policy permitting access is created.

**Group**: User groups consist of one or more users, usually members of the same
team or department (e.g. Engineering, DevOps, Sales) and can be used in Policies
to give all users in that Group access to a Resource. Users and groups can be
automatically synced from your Identity Provider (Google Workspace only) to
ensure only active users and groups maintain access to your Resources.
